---
title: "Paper Title Number 1"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2022-07-11-paper-1
excerpt: 'Study of altered calcium handling in the ER and its influence on neurotransmission.'
date: 2022-07-11
venue: 'Cells'
paperurl: 'http://temitopeoluwaleke.github.io/files/paper1.pdf'
citation: 'Adeoye. et al. (2022). &quot;Er and Exocytosis.&quot; <i>Cells</i>. 2022, 11, 2167.'
---

Neurotransmitter release from presynaptic terminals is primarily regulated by rapid Ca2+ influx through membrane-resident voltage-gated Ca2+ channels (VGCCs). Moreover, accumulating evidence indicates that the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) is extensively present in axonal terminals of neurons and plays a modulatory role in synaptic transmission by regulating Ca2+ levels. Familial Alzheimer’s disease (FAD) is marked by enhanced Ca2+ release from the ER and downregulation of Ca2+ buffering proteins. However, the precise consequence of impaired Ca2+ signaling within the vicinity of VGCCs (active zone (AZ)) on exocytosis is poorly understood. Here, we perform in silico experiments of intracellular Ca2+ signaling and exocytosis in a detailed biophysical model of hippocampal synapses to investigate the effect of aberrant Ca2+ signaling on neurotransmitter release in FAD. Our model predicts that enhanced Ca2+ release from the ER increases the probability of neurotransmitter release in FAD. Moreover, over very short timescales (30–60 ms), the model exhibits activity-dependent and enhanced short-term plasticity in FAD, indicating neuronal hyperactivity—a hallmark of the disease. Similar to previous observations in AD animal models, our model reveals that during prolonged stimulation (~450 ms), pathological Ca2+ signaling increases depression and desynchronization with stimulus, causing affected synapses to operate unreliably. Overall, our work provides direct evidence in support of a crucial role played by altered Ca2+ homeostasis mediated by intracellular stores in FAD.

[Download paper here](http://temitopeoluwaleke.github.io/files/paper1.pdf)

Recommended citation: Adeoye, T. (2022). "Upregulated Ca2+ Release from the Endoplasmic Reticulum Leads to Impaired Presynaptic Function in Familial Alzheimer’s Disease." <i>Cells</i>. 2022, 11, 2167.
